---
layout: post
title:  "Week 3 / 4 Notes - Barthes' Plates of the Encyclopedia"
date:   2014-02-18 06:40:00
categories: post
author: garhodes
---

Art of Data Visualization - W3</br></br>
Notes on Barthes' The Plates of the Encyclopedia (1964)</br></br>
& Looking at Hubway Data Challenge Winners</br></br>
http://hubwaydatachallenge.org/submission/leaderboard/
</br></br></br></br>
"History, like pornography, begins with the photograph.  Everything before was just someone's panting prose." </br></br>--Hollis Frampton

</br></br></br></br>
The Extinct Encyclopedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encyclopedia#History
</br></br></br></br>

In these notes I will play a game with this essay from 50 years ago, replacing 'encyclopedia' with data visualization wherever I can.

</br></br></br></br>
Barthes begins with the **Object**, and I think of DataVisualizations as making things into Objects, something which
</br></br>
"produces at once an inventory and a definition," separating image from text into an 'autonomous iconography'.
</br></br>
He compares this to the 'Great Expositions' like Chicago's white city on the lake....  of an "aesthetic and oneiric [dream] order"
</br></br></br>
I wonder, can Data Visualization, too, be 'apprehended' on three levels:
</br></br>
the **'anthological'**, 'isolated from any context.. presented in itself' [like an anthology, an edited and redacted collection]
</br></br>
the **'anecdotic'**, 'naturalized by its insertion into a .... vignette',
</br></br>
and the **'genetic'**, 'when the image offers us the trajectory from raw substance to finished object' (which sounds to me like process or algorithm... 'sometimes it IS, sometimes it is MADE, sometimes it even MAKES').
</br></br>
Of everything, Barthes finds that the theme of 'birth' is favored in Encyclopedias... like the origins of things... What is favored in DataVis?  What themes?  Not origins of machines, but....?
</br></br></br>
Barthes talking about the encyclopedia's fascination with wood--even wooden machines-- reminds me of Vilem Flusser talking about the etymology of 'technology', (hyle, Greek for wood), and the idea of carving forms from the raw natural material. 
</br>
http://books.google.com/books?id=d26wIxe-jsAC&pg=PA22&lpg=PA22&dq=flusser+hyle&source=bl&ots=ca1Uy6ojCg&sig=wxk1JB35zK4ViafpMnwghBcu3Mk&hl=en&sa=X&ei=LVsDU_r0G4OSyAH3q4GYAg&ved=0CC8Q6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q=flusser%20hyle&f=false
</br></br></br>
It is interesting that what he says about the photos of the encyclopedia, that the photos always include a human, is exactly what's repressed in DataVis-- you never see a human.  But there's a similarity to the aesthetics of the photos, 
</br></br>
"an aesthetic of bareness: huge, empty, well-lighted rooms... the simple, here, is nothing but the vital."  I wonder if we can find an analogue to the narrative process Barthes finds in the photos, from minimalist, to crowded signifying the process from "production to consumption"-- in the machine era, the movement from factory to shop.
</br></br>
I mean: if, in encyclopedias, 'production' is iconized as minimalist and mechanical, and 'use' as busy and among the humans... in data visualization, how is the 'origin' of the data normally iconized (aesthetically) and how is its 'function' normally aestheticized?
</br></br></br>
Let's replace 'encyclopedia' with 'data visualization': "Formally [in Data Visualization], ownership depends on a certain dividing up of things: to appropriate is to fragment the world, to divide it into finite objects subject to man in proportion to their very discontinuity: for we cannot separate without finally naming and classifying, and at that moment, property is born."
</br></br>
"inventory is never a neutral idea; to catalogue is not merely to ascertain... but also to appropriate" ... so what about the inventorying of information?  It's naming and categorization?  Who gets to own what?
</br></br></br>
And again...  "[In Data Visualization] the object has been endowed with an unfortunate opacity; assimilated to an inhuman state of nature, its proliferation cannot be noted without a sentiment of apocalypse or of alienation: the modern object is either asphyxiation or nausea."
</br></br>
The point here is that objects are inhuman, and there is an anxiety in being surrounded by them in the machine age.  The encyclopedia soothes this by picturing objects as "subjugated" to humans.  This sounds exactly like our discussion of data anxiety and data vis.  But if this is true, where are the humans depicted in Data Vis?  How do we know data is subjected and not alien?  Symmetry?  Proportion?  Color palette?
</br></br></br>
So if humans were always pictured in documenting the machine age, are machines always pictures when we now document the information age?  Is that why data vis is fascinated with lines, geometry, trig, Pythagorean aesthetics?
</br></br></br></br>

Finally, can we derive a similar **"Poetics of Data Visualization"?** ...defining 'poetics' as "the spere of the infinite vibrations of meaning, at the center of which is placed the literal object."  Meaning, the way that DataVis 'vibrates' "beyond its demonstrative intent" and creates a world view, a feeling, and ideology.  In encyclopedias, Barthes find poetics in "disproportion" (macroscopic, microscopic), and "immobility" ("a certain power of disproportion")-- are these the same qualities present in DataVis?
</br></br></br>

" [Data Visualization] constantly proceeds to an impious fragmentation of the world, but what it finds at the term of this fracture is not the fundamental state of pure causes; in most cases the image obliges it to recompose an object that is strictly UNREASONABLE; once the first nature is dissolved, another nature appears, quite as formed as the first.  In a word, the fracture of the world is impossible: a glance suffices—ours—for the world to be eternally complete."  
</br></br>
Meaning, there is something surreal and horrific in the encyclopedia which is always approaching objects from the "wrong side"-- a bronze statue is pictured and the process of making the statue with wax and cloth and tape, exactly the side from which you are not supposed to consider it like the aphorism about eating sausage versus seeing it made... Can we find this in DataVis?  Is there a horrific wrong-sidedness in DataVis?  ...A rational desire to see things turned inside out, to look at phenomena from causes instead of manifestations?  Like a bicycle ride as a statistical population?



</br></br></br></br>
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX</br></br>
Hubway competition winners:</br></br>
Chiraphadhanakul: Best, 'A Network Analysis of Hubway': interactive static
</br></br>
Goldenburg: Best Aesthetics, 'live' dataVis
</br></br>
Ducharne et all: Best Analysis, 'Hubway Bikes In / Bikes Out', interactive static
</br></br>
Ofsevit: Best Analysis, static report
</br></br>
Kim & Sakamato: Best Narrative, 'Hubway Seeking Metro Boston', static poster
</br></br>
Woodruff: Best Tool, 'Hubway Trip Explorer', static & pdf
</br></br>
Lokman: 404 - can't view
</br></br>
Simoneau: Honorable Mention (student projects generated with stats4stem)...

</br></br>

Questions: What are the poetics?  What is not here?  



</br></br>
</br></br>

A nice project.
<http://www.moma.org/visit/calendar/exhibitions/980>

