---
layout: post
title:  "ArtDataVis - Week2 notes"
date:   2014-02-04 00:00:00
categories: post
author: garhodes
---
</br></br>
ArtDataVis - W2 notes
</br></br>
In-class schedule:
</br></br>
Discuss critique terms w/ some reference to reading</br>
Present projects</br>
</br></br>
LUNCH</br>
</br></br>
Discuss and workshop the course schedule from syllabus</br>
GitHub markup (prep for picture posting)</br>
Make some groups of 2 or 3 to do in-class processing project (making a portrait from another's data)
</br></br>
Given time, or for next week— students discuss reading questions/notes in groups.
</br></br>
--for next week?  not sure.... continuation of that in-class project?--- groups of 2 or 3.
</br></br>
To post on GitHub: students to post pictures of ‘truthiness’ in data vis around them.
</br></br>
To read: Barthes, Plates of an ecyclopedia?  Or, On the Word Design (maybe more appropriate for this project)
</br></br>


——--------------------
</br></br></br>

Notes, Observations, Terms, and Questions from Flusser, ‘On Memory’</br></br></br></br>

Memory: a broad definition as all that which is preserved (in nature, in DNA, in physics & thermodynamics) and in opposition to,
</br></br>
Entropy: the dis-integrating force… I wonder what Flusser thinks of Entropy, he doesn’t say… is it the ultimate Good?  Or Bad?
</br></br>
History: is then the (non-existent but desired) uninterrupted chain of information, which can not be achieved through Noisy oral communication or noisy evolution and nature.
</br></br>
Material culture: human’s first attempt to preserve information—like a knife preserves the information of ‘how to cut’… “magical thinking,” like,
</br></br>
Monuments: objects that serve exclusively as memory supports, solved the problem of,
</br></br>
Waste: which is just ‘disinformed objects’, this was followed by noisy,
</br></br>
Oral culture: which brings about “mythical thinking,” and 
</br></br>
Written culture: which brings about linear causal thinking.
</br></br>
Written language: brought it’s own new religion, a
</br></br>
Platonic library: a library of superhuman memory to be served— ‘To know is to remember’— a philosophy in opposition to the,
</br></br>
Talmudic: relativistic, dialectic, discourse-driven ‘transhuman memory’ that seeks truth in the Other.  All this is a discussion of,
</br></br>
Epistemology: the study of how we know and understand Truth, and,
</br></br>
Ontology: the study of how we know and understand Being.
</br></br>
“Information in the Age of Electronic Memory”: provides humans with a ‘critical distance’ from their own information storage [so they can see the true Truth]; we no longer have to remember our memories and can instead engage in,
</br></br>
“Processing of information”: which is ‘creativity’, become Programmers (of information) instead of Workers (of materials), and finally see that,
</br></br>
“Memory is not a thing but a process”: that makes Art into Science and vice-versa, and resolves the dichotomy of ‘Objective Knowledge’ and ‘Subjective Experience’ [though I am not totally sure how].

</br></br></br></br>

Questions:</br></br></br>

If written language brought about linear causal thinking (and material, magical thinking, and oral mythical thinking), what is DataVis thinking?</br></br>

As is his nature, Flusser overshoots and leaves us a little hanging… how does ‘information in the age of electronic memory’ make Art into Science and vice versa?</br></br>



</br></br>
——---------------------------</br></br>
###Critique Terms

- "Feels"
    - 

- Intent vs ?
    - Subversive
    -

- Ideology
    - [Unknown, Knowns](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiPe1OiKQuk)
    - "Unthinking" (Too broad for Alan)
    - Something that is assumed before the disccusion begins
    
- Entropy
    - The 2nd law of thermodynamics
        - The tendency from something to go from being order to disorder
    - "Information" is not created 
    - [Shannon's Information Theory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_theory)
    
- Memory
    - "Information Storage" (after Flusser)
    - "Information"
    - "Artifacts" (salient artifacts?)
    
- Hegelian
    - Onward and upward forever.
    - History is going somewhere!  Things are getting better.
    - Coffee shop usage, in contrast to Postmodern idea that things just "go".  Not up or better ... just going.
    - y = m * x + b (m > 0) <= hegel

- Aesthethic
    - (See ideology)
    - Aesthetic arises out of ... um.
    - "The Packaging"
    - "of Beauty", Alan, 2014
    - gestalt - 
    - intentionally, subjectively ordered (organized)?
    - Negative Entropy
    - nevermind.
    
- Expressive (vs. Affected or Effected)
    - A super-modernist idea that everybody after AE is mocking.
    - An old useless term, based on the idea that beauty exists and can be recognized.
    - Tied to emotion and motion.
    - Related to or evoking emotion.
    - "Affected" vs. effected
    - Tied to the impulsive.
    - Ordered in a "human" way.
    - (yeah, just see aesthetic)
     
- Material
    - What is the "material here"?
    - What is the "material" of photoraphy?
    - What is the "medium" ... uh mixed.

- Ground (against Figure) - framing
    - The context where the "content" is situated <= This is the right answer.
    - Negative space
    - The aesthetic context
    - The setting
    - How it is situatued
    - Background 

- History
    - What you should delete after browsing.
    - An uninterrupted chain of memories that ... what was I saying?

- Monument
    - Objects that serve exclusively as memory supports, solved the problem of "hard" objects that "lose" their "memory".

- Artifact
    - An unintentional monument (see above)

- Ontology
    - "On the Nature of Being"
    - e.g. Can we even know what it is really like to be something else?
    - e.g. Why do we like to look at a live map of the wind?
    - e.g. Why is "real-time" more compelling than static?

- Epistemology
    - The study of how we "know" (and understand *_Truth_*).
    - e.g. Do we ever really know what is true?
        - Plato has an opinion about this, and thus has an epistemological viewpoint.
    
- Phenomenology
    - Husserl's Phenomenology
    - Truth can only be reduced to our experience of it
    - Things can't be reduced farther than it
    - "I don't know, but I know what I feel."

- Truthiness
    - [Defined](http://saic.github.io/TheArtOfDataVisualization/post/2014/02/03/truthiness.html)
 
- Sciency
    - Has the appearance of science / objectivity
    - Opposite of Truthy

- Noisy
    -

- Platonic
    -

- Objective Knowledge & Subjective Experience
    - See above.


